transcript excerpt from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zi5-90TnI3Y&t=5097s with Nora Bateson and Daniel Schmachtenberger

So um my 27 year old daughter about three years ago, maybe it was four called me up and she was in tears and I said what's wrong and she said Mom, I I don't know how to be a good person. I can't figure it out because every single thing that I do connects me to the destruction and the exploitation, whether I am taking the bus or whether I you know, am wearing clothes or you know going to the grocery store and getting granola. It doesn't matter what I do everything I do links me into this thing that you know we're describing as The Meta crisis um and when your kid calls and says that you can't brush that off. You can't just deliver some canned script. You know. Oh honey, don't worry about it, you know you just can't carry the weight of the world on your shoulders. It'S not! You can't say that when your kid calls and they're asking that question, you have to show up um with no actually, and so you know, the only thing I knew to say was keep asking the question: keep asking that question and know that I'm asking the same Question and I'm right here with you and that we will work on this together, but we have no idea um. So in that sense the the the kid that really wants to be a good person. This is so important. She wants to be a good person. You know you were saying the other night I'll, let you have your line because it's such an incredible line, but um. What I think happened with her and it continues - is that she has been in an ongoing conversation with me, since she was this big. That was a conversation about how are you perceiving the world? What do you see? What makes you see it like that? Where did you learn to see it like that? What, if you saw it like this, so for me the the greatest learning happens in these moments when we begin to perceive our own perception and and most of the time that happens in a way, that's a little bit confusing um, you know. Maybe it's culture mix up, maybe it's a communication mix-up, maybe it's a whatever! But that moment when you begin to perceive your own perception, uh and and my kids were in it from Pretty Young. We started in talking about that stuff, pretty young they can handle it. They loved it um, but but a lot of a lot of breakfast tables don't have those conversations at them, so I think we're we're kind of caught, also in a limited understanding of what kind of conversations you can have with your children and um and then there's I think a lot of times there's a all kinds of Developmental limitations that get assigned that aren't actually real. It'S just that there's not a lot of households doing it. So you don't know if you had a lot of households that, were you know, doing epistemological stuff with their three-year-olds four-year-olds, starting with language right, um, they're, pretty good at it by the time, they're eight and that's a different sort of way. So that kind of moves through some of this they they can do it it's there. This business of I am a perceiver perceiving the world is, is in there um. If you help it give language if it's held at the. If it's held at the table, it's there yeah so you're daughter's question of how do I be a good person when to do anything in the world? I am to some degree complicit with the world system and to not be complicit with. The world system also involves not being able to really affect it, um, which means I can't actually separate myself from the world that I live in, to have my hands clean. I am a part of a world system, and that doesn't mean that I just go along with it, but it also means I can't be completely free of its sins right like I am a part of this world system, which is very interesting um, and it relates To the question that you asked about um, you know just how to emotionally process and so that process. One of the big steps of where that started for me was. I was nine and I saw a cattle truck from a factory farm taking animals from a factory farm to a Slaughter and you've seen the trucks that have the holes for air in the side. And I went over and I looked at it and the cow closest to me was missing an eye and blood was coming from it and all the cows were in their feces and terrified and um. You know it was like a Auschwitz trained car or whatever, and I grew up eating meat without an understanding of what factory farms were and loving animals that you know it was just. I wasn't a cognitive dissonance because I didn't know better as a kid and um. So I asked my parents because I was I was shocked and horrified the way a kid would be and uh they said. That'S where me comes from, and so I got diet for a new America Reddit. You know that next day and then dove into Peta and going to factory farms, and that was the beginning of kind of animal rights work which then went from factory farms. To then also looking at overfishing and looking at whaling. And then that brought environmental issues and that brought the interconnected extreme poverty issues and just kind of the whole thing started. But I remember, starting with the factory farm thing and getting to see the scale of it right, getting to see that there were more totaled biomass of animals in factory farms than there were in the wild and uh. You know all that kind of thing and the that it's not like hunting. It'S not like an animal that has a natural life and then we kill it's like a continuity of torture, and I it was the first time that I was suicidal because I didn't like the world just didn't make sense that my species could do that and feel. Okay about it and I couldn't be complicit with it right so I'm like like. I can't this world feels like a crazy house to me and I want out, and then it wasn't that hard to think through. If I kill myself, all the animals are still in the factory farms and all the all the kids starving to death and all blah blah blah all those things I didn't change any of it. So it's like that's a ultimately selfish move to get out of suffering myself, it's a vicarious suffering, so I'm like okay, I can't do that. Can my life feel like a success while that's still happening like that was a media question of. If I focus on some things and can I know that there are other sentient beings that are in just utter trauma and torture, and yet I'm stoked because my life is good and I'm like well, I would have to. I would have to not know what I know, and I already know it so. I'D have to pretend to not know. I'D have to actively disconnect, which would mean I would have to choose to be a sociopath right. I would have to choose to disconnect I'm like all right. So the only way I can live in this world and just feel like my life is a success is as a sociopath and it just doesn't work for me. I can't do that. I can't shut off what I know, so I'm like all right. If - and you know this was very naive - this was nine years old, but I'm like I have to end factory farms. If I end factory farms, the animals aren't in that condition. I didn't know the rest of the meta crisis yet um I can live in a world where that's not the case, so I remember thinking if I die in factory farms haven't ended, then I failed at living in a way that I could be okay with, and You know, then, that just expanded from that to all the other issues and but what it did is say I um, I can't think about my life separate from life, separate from the whole of all the things, and you know I wasn't born into extreme poverty in Sudan, I wasn't born with AIDS. I wasn't born into a factory farm I could have been. I could easily be the Consciousness on that side and I can't take any Merit for having been born on this side. But I can do a lot more to get animals out of factory farms than they can do for themselves. And so that feels obligate right. But like a like an obligation, I wouldn't want out of like a sacred obligation and um and then the problem comes that I have no idea how to do it and then the problem comes that I get some ideas and they totally don't work right and so There'S a kind of existential devastation and then, if you pull yourself out of that, there's a naive optimism of how to possibly solve the things that will totally not work right. The early activist ideas I had, of course, got shattered on the rocks of how much more vested interest and how much more complicated and how the solutions I had in mind didn't factor a million of the causal Dynamics involved and um, and so then, back to existential Angst Devastation, but then the only answer is understand the problem better to know how to contribute to what might be adequate Solutions better and um, and I remember being like okay, so the Hippocratic Oath first Do no harm they'll, try to benefit things so I'll stop eating Meat that comes from factory farms, I'll stop. You know getting stuff that comes from sweatshops I'll stop, but pretty soon, like Nora's daughter's Insight. I realized I can't drive in a car. I can't take a bus, that's on a road and not be complicit with climate change and Supply chains that get the Cobalt from child slave labor mines and on and on, and so I'm like all right. I'Ve got to dwell in the forest and only gather things that I can gather myself and and even then I realize I can't actually not cause harm and I can't change the systems at all that way. And so then there was this recognition that I don't get to be a moral being separate from my species. Right, like I am a I'm, a part of a species, I'm a part of um the world and so uh the inheriting the sins of the forefathers, the sins of the world. If I'm to operate in it at all, I'm part of which also means that I have an ethical responsibility to try to change as best I can, and so there's something nice about not feeling like you can have the perfect moral High Ground and recognizing no, I Can'T but also not just accepting that and going nihilist right saying like I want to Endeavor to do better, and I cannot do perfectly, and so when someone is trying to figure out how do I be a good person if it's really obvious they're dangerous right, because Everybody on both sides of all Holy Wars is crystal clear that their site is right and if you are really factoring all the complexity be like. I don't know if the thing the choice I'm planning on making is right. I don't know factoring the second third order affects everybody else, who's involved, but you can't stay stuck in the because I don't want to be over certain and because I want to factor appropriate uncertainty, you can easily go nihilist from too much uncertainty and just be like. I have no idea: how could I give up that doesn't work either so you've got to say under partial and incomplete information, not being certain and yet being able to have relatively higher certainties than others. What is and being able to notice and correct for my own biases as best I can, how do I make the best choices that I can that are imperfect, but are importantly better than other choices, where I also realize that not acting has moral consequences, because I'm Then complicit with whatever happens that I didn't do something about so when I realize that there's moral consequence, ethical consequence to both action and non-action and that I will always be acting under partial information. Then I've got to be really comfortable with uncertainty and also comfortable with relatively better certainties that can inform choice. And yet my relatively better certainty still needs to be open to being radically changed with new insight, new information and um. So that's you know, and it's really interesting thing about having kids. You know you're asking how how my experience so I'm giving my experience as a kid being exposed, so a lot of parents might be like do. I want to show my kids what the inside of a factory farm looks like do. I want to show them what extreme Poverty Looks like, or what clear cutting line in the Amazon looks like, because you know I grew up with nightmares because of those things and you're going to traumatize them through the vicarious trauma of the reality of the world. Do I not want to and have them have some happiness, that's based on lies that makes them unfit to deal with the world that they will end up having to face and where they can't be part of addressing it. So you know I would say no. I want to choose to help them understand the world, but when are they ready for what things? How do you help them process it? I don't think there's a formulaic answer for that um. How do you raise kids now, where you can't predict what the Adaptive skills will be that they need, but where you also are not just trying to optimize for their quality of life, even though you love them so much, but for the possibility of life for the Whole world ongoingly that they can contribute to right um and they want to they want that too. You know, I think that that's that's part of that thing is that this is not a parking place. You can't just come to a position and just lock in it's an ongoing shifting, ever rigorous exploration of some some very tense choices, and what the what that means to be in that uh that work actually and the habit of doing that, because you have to be In uncertainty, you have to be comfortable, but not too comfortable in that uncertainty, because if you get too comfortable in in certainty uncertainty, then you become shallow and nihilistic. I mean either one for some people. Ambiguity is just a a way of brushing it off. Oh, this is just a mystery. I just can't know it. So why bother, which is actually plausible deniability if we're doing whatever the you want right, and so I remember in your talk on Thursday, there was one word that kept coming up. That was really important for me that I noticed, and it was the word justify um you were Daniel - was describing this meta crisis in much greater detail than tonight. Tonight was plenty, thank you, um and the word justify kept coming up. In what way are we justifying this action or that action or this approach or that approach, and what's allowing for that justification? What are the underpinnings of that justification? Um? What I was impressed with in my daughter's question was that she wasn't looking for justification. That'S that's really important and not easy. You know we talk about moving from unwarranted un unwarranted certainty in into uncertainty and unwarranted Simplicity into the real complexity of things, but uncertainty and complexity can also be weaponized. I can obviously say: oh, we can't know for sure such and such about climate change therefore continue maximizing GDP with oil or whatever the I want to. So we can weaponize uncertainty and we can weaponize complexity by saying it's. You have a very complex situation. I can cherry pick the facts to support any argument. I want so the statistical Warfare right, a subset. We talk about kinetic Warfare, but then there's non-kinetic Warfare and population-centric warfare, the fight for the minds and hearts of the people. Um population Centric Warfare happens through information Warfare controlling what people believe is true and narrative. Warfare controlling the who they feel is good and right and the end group, they're part of and and statistics are just such an amazing weapon right. We wrote a paper that can science project called how to mislead with facts, and it shows why you can write an article where all of the facts in it will pass the most rigorous fact Checker. But because you Lake off frame meaning do I call them terrorists or Freedom Fighters? Do I call it a protest or a riot? Do I call it undocumented workers or illegal aliens by Lake Hoff framing which is not a fact or non-fact right? It'S adding moral, valence or aesthetic valence to the thing by cherry picking the stats, because I can have stats that will tell very opposite sides of a story because I'll have a gaussian distribution of Truth, and I can cherry pick them and by decontextualizing them. Oh, the average person in the United States in 1815 only lived on a dollar and a half a day, and now they live on such and such yeah, but they grew their own food and they made their own house and it wasn't mediated by dollars. You decontextualize that fact, in a way that made it nonsense, um by decontextualizing, facts, lakov, framing them and uh cherry picking them. I can make any argument. I want with rigorous facts, and so this is basically how mainstream journals lie. Um and or you know, mislead and you're talking about justification, there's almost like there's a the dominant Narrative of a culture is the apologism for the power structure of the culture it kind of has to be right, and so, of course, if you look at the like, You look at the way that somebody like the Gates Foundation, upregulates, Hans rossling and Stephen Pinker, because if you made a lot of money through capitalism in Tech, the thinkers who say, capitalism and Tech makes everything better. Because they cherry pick and like off, frame and decontextualize. Someone who wants that as the apologism to support their power system and say why their power system is good, they'll upregulate, those thinkers. So we wrote another paper called the where arguments come from and it's basically the arguments that start to proliferate. Don'T proliferate for no reason and they don't proliferate just based on what is objectively true, they proliferate, because someone funded that research and then someone funded spreading it because it supports and someone funded it. Who has the resources to fund it because it supports whatever that dominant system is so yeah the earnestness to want to know what is actually true and not just true but representative right, because I can have a truth on one side of a cherry-picked argument: um, it's The process of wanting Tobias correct, I think, and trying to deepen earnestness, is really critical. So that's what you're mentioning on justify this is totally unrelated, but there was one thing that I didn't say to your thing that I wanted to say because I think it's more important than what I said so far. There'S a famous saying in activism that if you aren't outraged, you aren't paying attention and that was like from the 60s or 70s, but obviously now with catastrophic risk. You know people can say more like if you aren't freaked the out, you aren't paying attention but of course, like Rumi or hafez would say, if you aren't in utter awe at the beauty of reality, aren't paying attention and that's true and it it's the truth of That that makes the other one what it is, because if reality was not beautiful, it wasn't magnificent. I wouldn't give a about if it's going to burn down, and so, if I don't connect to the awe at the beauty of it enough my outrage or whatever will actually mislead me. You know, and so there's an interesting thing like am, I people will ask um, you know how do I process all the stuff in my optimistic pessimistic, I absolutely see um possibilities for political economies and infrastructures and cultures that work within physics and work with what I Believe human nature to be that are implementable in time that create both a desirable and doable world. So I do not think that we have fundamental impossibility issues that by no means means we will figure it out right, but my my motivation is not because I believe we will like it's actually not from some optimism like that. It'S um one. I think it's very healthy for people to have experiences that simulate death, so they're comfortable death, their own death and being comfortable with your own death. You and comfortable with the reality of death. I think is really important for facing the world effectively because I'm not trying to prevent the inexorable in that way. I'M not freaked out by impermanence um, so I think, being comfortable with death is one thing I think being awed by the beauty of life? Is the next thing and then realizing that the fear of the outrage, or only because I actually love reality? Otherwise I wouldn't care and then tracing the fear and the outrage and the blame back to that love and then saying. How do I be best in service to it? Not because I know for sure it'll succeed, but just because it's the only thing that makes sense like it's the only thing that has coherence to it. I mean you, don't have little kids in your house, but when I had little kids in my house, this is probably the most important thing you can model and it's both it's it's this this recognition. I mean, I remember saying I'm really angry because I care right. I I'm really concerned about this, and and whatever it is, it was it underneath it is the they are for the magnificence of life, and you know it's very important that that be part of the experience of the day, whether it's the raspberries on your granola or The you know a poem or a thought, or just you know, when you look across the room and you see somebody that you love and it's just incredible how much you can love them or whatever it is. But but that is the reason for getting up tomorrow and keeping on doing it and working with everything you've got. There is no other reason, because there's certainly no promise of success whatever that is even the non-sociopathic kind. So I I think that that, for me has been you know with my kids and - and I got that from my dad too, he was he. He would do this thing where he would look at a tree, or you know whatever it was a forest or a tide pool and seeing a crab or a sea, anemone and just just beam say. Ah you know what a beauty that one is. Sir look at this fella, he would say this little, you know, but it was like this delight in life that superseded everything else and then, but it it fuels everything. The reason for studying everything is not because you want to be the smartest person in the room. It'S because it's incredible.
